---
lang: Serbian
lang-ref: ch.01-2
lecturer: Yann LeCun
title: Evolution and Uses of CNNs and Why Deep Learning?
authors: Marina Zavalina, Peeyush Jain, Adrian Pearl, Davida Kollmar
date: 27 Jan 2020
translation-date: 13 Dec 2020
translator: Ema Pajić
---


## [Evolucija konvolucionih neuronskih mreža (CNN)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0bMe_vCZo30&t=2965s)

U mozgu životinja, neuroni reaguju na ivice koje su specifične orijentacije. Grupe neurona koje reaguju na istu orijentaciju nalaze se svuda po vidnom polju.

Fukušima je 1982. godine napravio neuronsku mrežu koja je radila na isti način kao i mozak, bazirano na 2 koncepta. Prvo, neuroni su postavljeni po celom vidnom polju. Drugo, postoje kompleksne ćelije koje agregiraju informacije iz jednostavnih ćelija (jedinica koje reaguju na orijentaciju). Kao rezultat, pomeraj slike će uticati na aktivacije jednostavnih ćelija, ali neće uticati na agregiranu aktivaciju komplikovane ćelije (agregiranje konvolucijom).

LeCun je 1990. godine iskoristio propagaciju unazad da obuči konvolucionu neuronsku mrežu da prepozna rukom pisane cifre. Postoji video iz 1992. gde algoritam prepoznaje cifre napisane različitim stilovima. Prepoznavanje karaktera / oblika koristeći model koji rešava problem od početka do kraja je bilo novo u to vreme. Ranije je bilo neophodno izvlačenje obeležja pre modela nadgledanog učenja.

Ovi novi CNN sistemi su mogli da prepoznaju više karaktera na slici istovremeno. To se radilo tako što je postojao mali prozor koji se pomerao po celoj slici i on je prosleđivan na ulaz modela. Ako se aktivira, to znači da je prisutan određeni karakter.

Kasnije je ova ideja primenjena na detekciju lica / ljudi i semantičku segmentaciju (klasifikaciju piksela na slici). Primeri za to su Hadsel (2009) i Farabet (2012). Vremenom je ovo postalo popularno u industriji i koristi se, na primer, za praćenje trake na putu u autonomnoj vožnji.

Specijalan hardver za obučavanje konvolucionih neuronskih mreža je bila popularna tema 1980-ih, zatim je interesovanje opalo, ali se ponovo vratilo u skorije vreme.

Revolucija dubokog učenja (doduše, ovaj termin se nije koristio u to vreme) je počela 2010.-2013. Naučnici su se fokusirali na smišljanje algoritama koji bi mogli da ubrzaju treniranje velikih konvolucionih neuronskih mreža. Križevski je 2012. smislio AlexNet, mnogo veću konvolucionu neuronsku mrežu nego što su ranije koriščene, i obučio je na ImageNet-u (skupu podataka sa oko 1.3 miliona odbiraka) koristeći GPU (Grafičku procesorsku jedinicu). Nakon obučavanja nekoliko nedelja, AlexNet je imao značajno bolje rezultate od najboljih rivalskih sistema -- 25.8% *vs.* 16.4% top-5 procenat greške.

Nakon uspeha AlexNet-a, naučnici iz oblasti računarske vizije su bili ubeđeni da konvolucione neuronske mreže rade. Dok su svi radovi iz 2011.-2012. koji su pominjali CNN bili odbijeni, nakon 2016. najveći broj objavljenih radova koristi CNN.

Vremenom se broj slojeva povećavao: LeNet -- 7, AlexNet -- 12, VGG -- 19, ResNet -- 50. Međutim, postoji kompromis između broja operacija potrebnog da se sračuna izlaz modela, veličine modela i njegove tačnosti. Iz tog razloga, trenutno popularna tema je kako kompresovati mreže da bi bile brže.



## [Deep Learning and Feature Extraction](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0bMe_vCZo30&t=3955s)

Multilayer networks are successful because they exploit the compositional structure of natural data. In compositional hierarchy, combinations of objects at one layer in the hierarchy form the objects at the next layer. If we mimic this hierarchy as multiple layers and let the network learn the appropriate combination of features, we get what is called Deep Learning architecture. Thus, Deep Learning networks are hierarchical in nature.

Deep learning architectures have led to an incredible progress in computer vision tasks ranging from identifying and generating accurate masks around the objects to identifying spatial properties of an object. Mask-RCNN and RetinaNet architectures mainly led to this improvement.

Mask RCNNs have found their use in segmenting individual objects, *i.e.* creating masks for each object in an image. The input and output are both images. The architecture can also be used to do instance segmentation, *i.e.* identifying different objects of the same type in an image. Detectron, a Facebook AI Research (FAIR) software system, implements all these state-of-the-art object detection algorithms and is open source.

Some of the practical applications of CNNs are powering autonomous driving and analysing medical images.

Although the science and mathematics behind deep learning is fairly understood, there are still some interesting questions that require more research. These questions include: Why do architectures with multiple layers perform better, given that we can approximate any function with two layers? Why do CNNs work well with natural data such as speech, images, and text? How are we able to optimize non-convex functions so well? Why do over-parametrised architectures work?

Feature extraction consists of expanding the representational dimension such that the expanded features are more likely to be linearly separable; data points in higher dimensional space are more likely to be linearly separable due to the increase in the number of possible separating planes.

Earlier machine learning practitioners relied on high quality, hand crafted, and task specific features to build artificial intelligence models, but with the advent of Deep Learning, the models are able to extract the generic features automatically. Some common approaches used in feature extraction algorithms are highlighted below:

- Space tiling
- Random Projections
- Polynomial Classifier (feature cross-products)
- Radial basis functions
- Kernel Machines

Because of the compositional nature of data, learned features have a hierarchy of representations with increasing level of abstractions. For example:

-  Images - At the most granular level, images can be thought of as pixels. Combination of pixels constitute edges which when combined forms textons (multi-edge shapes). Textons form motifs and motifs form parts of the image. By combining these parts together we get the final image.
-  Text - Similarly, there is an inherent hierarchy in textual data. Characters form words, when we combine words together we get word-groups, then clauses, then by combining clauses we get sentences. Sentences finally tell us what story is being conveyed.
-  Speech - In speech, samples compose bands, which compose sounds, which compose phones, then phonemes, then whole words, then sentences, thus showing a clear hierarchy in representation.



## [Learning representations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0bMe_vCZo30&t=4767s)

There are those who dismiss Deep Learning: if we can approximate any function with 2 layers, why have more?

For example: SVMs find a separating hyperplane "in the span of the data", meaning predictions are based on comparisons to training examples. SVMs are essentially a very simplistic 2 layer neural net, where the first layer defines "templates" and the second layer is a linear classifier. The problem with 2 layer fallacy is that the complexity and size of the middle layer is exponential in $N$ (to do well with a difficult task, need LOTS of templates). But if you expand the number of layers to $\log(N)$, the layers become linear in $N$. There is a trade-off between time and space.

An analogy is designing a circuit to compute a boolean function with no more than two layers of gates -- we can compute **any boolean function** this way! But, the complexity and resources of the first layer (number of gates) quickly becomes infeasible for complex functions.

What is "deep"?

- An SVM isn't deep because it only has two layers
- A classification tree isn't deep because every layer analyses the same (raw) features
- A deep network has several layers and uses them to build a **hierarchy of features of increasing complexity**

How can models learn representations (good features)?

Manifold hypothesis: natural data lives in a low-dimensional manifold. Set of possible images is essentially infinite, set of "natural" images is a tiny subset. For example: for an image of a person, the set of possible images is on the order of magnitude of the number of face muscles they can move (degrees of freedom) ~ 50. An ideal (and unrealistic) feature extractor represents all the factors of variation (each of the muscles, lighting, *etc.*).

Q&A from the end of lecture:

- For the face example, could some other dimensionality reduction technique (*i.e.* PCA) extract these features?
  - Answer: would only work if the manifold surface is a hyperplane, which it is not

