---
lang-ref: ch.14-4
title: Lagrangian Formulation of Backpropagation
authors: Joseph Morag
date: 4 May 2020
---
# Lagrangian formulation of Backpropagation
For an input $x$ and target output $y$, we can formulate a network as a collection of functions, $f_k$ and weights, $w_k$ such that successive steps in the network output $z_k$ with $z_{k+1} = f_k(z_k, w_k)$. In a supervised setting, the goal of the network is to minimize $C(z_n, y)$, the cost of the $n^\mathrm{th}$ output of the network, with respect to the ground truth. This is equivalent to the problem of minimizing $C(z_n, y)$ with respect to the constraints $z_{k+1} = f_k(z_k, w_k)$ and $z_0 = x$.

The Lagrangian can be written:
$$ \mathcal{L}(x, y, \lambda_i, z_i, w_i) = C(z_n, y) + \sum_{k=0}^{n-1} \lambda^T_{k+1}(z_{k+1} - f_k(z_k, w_k)) $$
where the $ \lambda $ terms denote Lagrange multipliers (see [Paul's online notes](http://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcIII/LagrangeMultipliers.aspx) for a refresher if Calc 3 was a while ago).

To minimize $\mathcal{L}$, we need to set the partial derivatives of $\mathcal{L}$ with respect to each of it's arguments to zero and solve.

- For $\lambda$, we simply recover the constraint: $\frac{\partial{\mathcal{L}}}{\partial \lambda_{k+1}} = 0 \rightarrow z_{k+1} = f_k(z_k, w_k)$.
- For $z_k$, $\frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial z_k} = 0 \rightarrow \lambda^T_k - \lambda^T_{k+1} \frac{\partial f_k(z_k, w)}{\partial z_k} \rightarrow \lambda_k = \frac{\partial f_k(z_k, w_k)^T}{\partial z_k}\lambda_{k+1}$, which is just the standard backpropagation formula.

This approach originated with Lagrange and Hamilton in the context of Classical Mechanics, where the minimization is over the energy of the system and the $\lambda$ terms denote physical constraints of the system, such as two balls being forced to stay at a fixed distance from each other by virtue of being attached by a metal bar, for example.

In a situation where we need to minimize the cost $C$ at every time step, $k$, the Lagrangian becomes
$$ \mathcal{L} = \sum_k \left(C_k(z_k, y_k) + \lambda^T_{k+1}(z_{k+1} - f_k(z_k, w_k)) \right) $$.

# Neural Ordinary Differential Equation
Using this formulation of backprop, we can now talk about a new class of models, Neural ODEs. These are basically recurrent networks where the state, $z$, at time $t$ is given by
$ z_{t+dt} = z_t + f(z_t, W) dt  $, where $ W$ represents some set of fixed parameters. This can also be expressed as an ordinary differential equation (no partial derivatives): $\frac{dz}{dt} = f(z_t, W)$.

Training such a network using the Lagrangian formulation is very straightforward. If we have a target, $y$, and want the state of the system to reach $y$ by time $T$, we simply establish the cost function as the distance between $z_T$ and $y$. Another goal of the network could be to find a stable state of the system, i.e. one that ceases to change after a certain point. Mathematically, this is equivalent to setting $\frac{dz}{dt} = f(y, W) = 0$. In general, finding a solution, $y$ to this equation is much easier than back propagation through time, because the network need not remember the gradient with respect to the whole sequence, and only has to minimize $f$ or $\lvert f \rvert^2$. For more information about training neural ODE's to reach fixed points, see [(Lecun88)](http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/publis/pdf/lecun-88.pdf).
